ROI segmentation with Cellpose
================

- <a href="#overview" id="toc-overview">Overview</a>
- <a href="#image-pre-processing" id="toc-image-pre-processing">Image
  pre-processing</a>
- <a href="#cellpose-to-get-cell-andor-nuclear-outlines"
  id="toc-cellpose-to-get-cell-andor-nuclear-outlines">Cellpose to get
  cell and/or nuclear outlines</a>
  - <a href="#locally" id="toc-locally">Locally</a>
    - <a href="#installation-on-windows"
      id="toc-installation-on-windows">Installation on Windows</a>
    - <a href="#note-mac-as-of-october-2022"
      id="toc-note-mac-as-of-october-2022">Note: Mac (as of October 2022)</a>
    - <a href="#the-gui" id="toc-the-gui">The GUI</a>
    - <a href="#jupyter-notebook" id="toc-jupyter-notebook">Jupyter
      Notebook</a>
  - <a href="#on-a-remote-server" id="toc-on-a-remote-server">On a remote
    server</a>
    - <a href="#in-the-command-line-or-a-script"
      id="toc-in-the-command-line-or-a-script">In the command line or a
      script</a>
- <a href="#references" id="toc-references">References</a>

## Overview

This pipeline is designed to provide single-cell resolution gene
expression data to the qualitative, visual data generated by v3 HCR-FISH
(Choi et al. 2018). This pipeline assumes basic familiarity with the
command line, [Anaconda package manager](https://anaconda.org), and
Jupyter Notebook (Granger and Pérez 2021) or a text editor like Vim.

## Image pre-processing

Hopefully while imaging you’ve already processed the direct images with
AiryScan processing, stitching, and max intensity projection. Then you
will need to divide your processed whole-tissue, four-channel image to
separate out tissue of interest (blastema, epithelium, and mesenchyme,
for example) as well as splitting the color channels. [The instructions
for doing this are here](./Tissue_Isolation.md).

## Cellpose to get cell and/or nuclear outlines

Cellpose is a machine-learning algorithm designed for cell and nucleus
segmentation in both 2D and 3D Pachitariu and Stringer (2022). There is
support for [a GUI](#the-gui) as well as use [in the command
line](#in-the-command-line-or-a-script) and [Jupyter
Notebook](#jupyter-notebook). It also [has pretty good
documentation](https://cellpose.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and [a
detailed GitHub page](https://github.com/MouseLand/cellpose) that makes
it easy to navigate.

### Locally

#### Installation on Windows

Follow [the instructions here](https://github.com/MouseLand/cellpose)
for how to install Cellpose on a Windows or Linux system, including if
you want GUI support or not. It’s fairly straightforward if you are
familiar with Anaconda.

#### Note: Mac (as of October 2022)

There is a dependency of Cellpose that is currently too out-of-date to
be compatible with the newest Mac software. Hopefully this will be
resolved soon. If you follow the instructions above for a Linux system,
you will still successfully install Cellpose. The issue is that Cellpose
won’t be able to utilize your computer’s GPU, and instead will resort to
CPUs (which it will tell you if you try to run it in the command line or
a Jupyter Notebook). Cellpose will attempt to run, but it could take
upwards of an hour to segment one image, and eat up enough RAM in the
process that it could crash your machine. If you have a Mac, and this
dependency issue is not yet resolved, I cannot recommend enough that you
save yourself the trouble and [instead use a computing
cluster](#on-a-remote-server).

#### The GUI

If you installed Cellpose with the GUI above, you will have the ability
to open a user application to run Cellpose through. It’s as easy as
setting your parameters and then dragging your `.tif` into the screen,
where Cellpose will begin segmenting. This is good for when you only
have a few images, but as your numbers grow, you’ll want to consider
automating the segmentation in [something like
Jupyter](#jupyter-notebook) or a script [on a computing
cluster](#in-the-command-line-or-a-script). [Visit the Cellpose
documentation](https://cellpose.readthedocs.io/en/latest/gui.html) for
more information about the GUI.

The most important thing is that, when Cellpose is done segmenting and
you’re happy with the results, go to `File` in the top-left and **save
the text outlines** of the segmentation. No other output is necessary
for this pipeline.

#### Jupyter Notebook

Jupyter Notebook is a user-friendly interface for writing and executing
programs, especially if they can have a visual output (like Cellpose!).

There is [an example notebook for running Cellpose segmentation
here](https://nbviewer.org/github/MouseLand/cellpose/blob/master/notebooks/run_cellpose.ipynb).
I also have [a Notebook for running Cellpose in a loop
here](./scripts/run_cellpose.ipynb). Be sure to **always save the text
outlines**! You don’t need any other output for the purposes of this
analysis.

Again, if you have a Mac and can’t utilize GPUs, I don’t recommend this
method.

### On a remote server

Reach out to your organization’s computing cluster support to gain
access to your cluster. With `anaconda` loaded in your `$PATH`, follow
[the instructions on the Cellpose GitHub
page](https://github.com/MouseLand/cellpose) to install Cellpose exactly
as you do locally, but **without** the GUI. You may have to use the
steps to install `cudatoolkit` for Linux if you are unable to connect to
GPU. The details of installing and running Cellpose on a remote cluster
will be particular to your organization’s infrastructure, so reach out
to your cluster’s support if you need help.

#### In the command line or a script

With Cellpose installed in an Anaconda environment, it’s possible to run
Cellpose directly from the command line or job script. There is [a
breakdown of command line commands
here](https://cellpose.readthedocs.io/en/latest/command.html). I’ve
found that Cellpose sometimes struggles with `--diameter` set to `0` for
automatic diameter estimation, so play around to find a good value. This
may take some trial and error to find a diameter that segments well. The
other important part is to use the `--save_txt` flag to **save the text
outlines**.

You can also write these commands into a script for batch processing.
Create your `conda` environment as before. Then, use `vim` to create
`cellpose.sh`:

``` bash
$ vim cellpose.sh
```

You can then enter the following ([a copy is available in the scripts
directory](./scripts/cellpose.sh)):

``` bash
#!/bin/bash

conda activate cellpose

# Edit the parameters below for your segmentation
# Descriptions of parameters and additional flags are available in the cellpose documentation
# Be sure to edit the file path to your images!!!
python -m cellpose \
  --verbose \
  --use_gpu \
  --dir </path/to/images/> \
  --pretrained_model cyto2 \
  --chan 0 --chan2 0 \
  --diameter 0 \
  --save_txt \
  --no_npy
```

Again, look at [the cellpose
documentation](https://cellpose.readthedocs.io/en/latest/command.html)
for more information on how to run Cellpose in the command line. For a
grayscale cytoplasm image with no other color, `--chan` and `--chan2`
should both be `0`.

## References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-RN149" class="csl-entry">

Choi, Harry M. T., Maayan Schwarzkopf, Mark E. Fornace, Aneesh Acharya,
Georgios Artavanis, Johannes Stegmaier, Alexandre Cunha, and Niles A.
Pierce. 2018. “Third-Generation in Situ Hybridization Chain Reaction:
Multiplexed, Quantitative, Sensitive, Versatile, Robust.” Journal
Article. *Development* 145 (12): dev165753.
<https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.165753>.

</div>

<div id="ref-9387490" class="csl-entry">

Granger, Brian E., and Fernando Pérez. 2021. “Jupyter: Thinking and
Storytelling with Code and Data.” *Computing in Science & Engineering*
23 (2): 7–14. <https://doi.org/10.1109/MCSE.2021.3059263>.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN152" class="csl-entry">

Pachitariu, Marius, and Carsen Stringer. 2022. “Cellpose 2.0: How to
Train Your Own Model.” Journal Article. *Nature Methods* 19 (12):
1634–41. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01663-4>.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN151" class="csl-entry">

Stringer, Carsen, Tim Wang, Michalis Michaelos, and Marius Pachitariu.
2021. “Cellpose: A Generalist Algorithm for Cellular Segmentation.”
Journal Article. *Nature Methods* 18 (1): 100–106.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-020-01018-x>.

</div>

</div>
